---
title: >-
  The Relationship Between NEO-five Personality Traits and Sleep-related
  Characteristics: A Systematic Review and Meta-analysis
collection: publications
category: manuscripts
date: 2025-03-29T00:00:00+01:00
venue: Sleep Medicine Reviews
paperurl: /files/Wang-2025-The Relationship Between NEO-five Pe.pdf
citation: >-
  Wang, R., Mu, Z., Li, X., Cheung, F. T. W., Chan, N. Y., Chan, J. W. Y., ... &
  Li, S. X. (2025). The relationship between NEO-five personality traits and
  sleep-related characteristics: A systematic review and meta-analysis. Sleep
  Medicine Reviews, 102081.
---
### Authors

Ran Wang, Zexuan Mu, Xiao Li, **Forrest Tin Wai Cheung**, Ngan Yin Chan, Joey Wing Yan Chan, Yun Kwok Wing, Shirley Xin Li

### Abstract

An increasing body of research has suggested personality traits as a possible predisposing factor for individual differences in sleep pattern and problems. However, the findings were mixed and there remained a lack of a quantitative synthesis. As searched in the four databases (Web of Science, Embase, PsycINFO, PubMed), 60 studies (n = 73,540; female = 60 %) that used standardized measures to evaluate the relationship between NEO-five personality traits and sleep-related outcomes (sleep quality and sleep duration) were identified. Meta-analyses were performed using random-effects model and the results suggested that poor sleep quality was associated with a higher level of neuroticism (r = 0.287) but a lower degree of openness (r = −0.042), conscientiousness (r = −0.132), extraversion (r = −0.086), and agreeableness (r = -0.064). Shorter sleep duration was found to be associated with a higher level of neuroticism (r = 0.066) but not with other personality dimensions. The findings were mainly limited to the general population. Future research should investigate whether comparable patterns of associations are present in the clinical populations. There is also a need for more research with a prospective design utilizing objective sleep measurements and to explore the mechanisms underlying the association of personality factors with sleep-related characteristics, especially sleep quality and duration.