---
title: Construction and validation of the Hong Kong Altruism Index
collection: publications
category: manuscripts
date: 2017-06-22T00:00:00+01:00
venue: Personality and Individual Differences
paperurl: /files/Cheng-2017-Construction and validation of the.pdf
citation: >-
  Cheng, Q., Kwok, C. L., Cheung, F. T., & Yip, P. S. (2017). Construction and
  validation of the Hong Kong Altruism Index (A-Index). Personality and
  Individual Differences, 113, 201-208.
---
### Authors

> Cheng Qijin, Kwok Chi-Leung, **Cheung Forrest T.W.**, Yip Paul S.F.

### Abstract

The study aimed to construct a valid and culturally sensitive scale to measure altruism in Hong Kong, namely, the Hong Kong Altruism Index (A-Index). Applying the Delphi technique, 11 behavioral items were selected to be included as to indicate altruistic level in Hong Kong (Study 1). Analysis of a community sample of 1104 participants confirmed the A-Index’s structure, theoretical dimensions, and construct validity (Study 2). Particularly, it was found that the concept of altruism can be well explained in four dimensions, including volunteering, monetary donation, blood and organ donation, and informal helping. Normative data were also calculated based on the finalized A-Index scoring method. A subsequent analysis showed all items demonstrated good reliability (Study 3). Finally, a focus group study with participants from a diverse social background (Study 4) provided an in-depth review of all items of the A-Index in Hong Kong. The A-Index is found to be psychometrically valid and practically convenient for measuring altruism. Findings highlighted the importance of cross-cultural awareness in the measurement of social phenomenon with a special discussion on the motive of blood and organ donations.