---
title: >-
  Validation of the Chinese version of the Munich Chronotype Questionnaire
  (MCTQHK) in Hong Kong Chinese youths
collection: publications
category: manuscripts
date: 2022-01-07T00:00:00+01:00
venue: Chronobiology International
paperurl: /files/Cheung-2022-Validation of the Chinese version.pdf
citation: >-
  Cheung, F. T. W., Ho, A. W. Y., Chan, J. W. Y., Li, X., Chan, N. Y., Zhang,
  J., Ho, C. S., Wing, Y. K., & Li, S. X. (2022). Validation of the Chinese
  version of the Munich Chronotype Questionnaire (MCTQHK) in Hong Kong Chinese
  youths. Chronobiology international, 39(5), 678–689.
---
### Authors

> **Forrest Tin Wai Cheung**, Amy Wing Yin Ho, Joey Wing Yan Chan, Xiao Li, Ngan Yin Chan, Jihui Zhang, Chung Shun Ho, Yun Kwok Wing, Shirley Xin Li

### Abstract

Chronotype, referred to as an individual’s diurnal preference of timing for rest and activity, can be subjectively measured using the Munich Chronotype Questionnaire (MCTQ). However, the validity of MCTQ has yet to be tested in the youth population. In addition, it remains uncertain if MCTQ is a good measure of chronotype in individuals with insomnia. The current study aimed to validate the Chinese version of MCTQ (MCTQHK) in the youth population and to explore the utility of MCTQHK in individuals with insomnia. The original MCTQ was translated into Chinese language using the translation-back-translation method. Part one of this study included 988 youths who completed a battery of self-report questionnaires online consisting of the MCTQHK and the morningness-eveningness questionnaire (MEQ) for the measures of circadian preference, Insomnia Severity Index (ISI) to assess insomnia symptoms, and Patient Health Questionnaire (PHQ-9) to measure depressive symptoms. Test-retest reliability was examined in 442 participants at one-month follow-up. Of the overall sample, 69 participants were randomly drawn to complete the second part of the study, which included prospective 7-day actigraphy monitoring and a further subset (n = 40) additionally completed a laboratory-based assessment of dim-light melatonin onset (DLMO) as a circadian phase marker. A total of 659 participants with valid responses were finally included in the analyses of the data collected from part one of the study (female = 67.7%; mean age: 20.7 ± 2.02). Results showed that MCTQ parameters, namely the midpoint of sleep on free days (MSF), midpoint of sleep on workdays (MSW), and midpoint of sleep adjusted for sleep debt (MSFsc), were significantly correlated with MEQ score (r = -.514 to -.650, p &lt; .01). Test-retest reliability for MCTQHK was good (intraclass correlation = 0.75 to 0.84). Later MSFsc was significantly associated with greater insomnia and depressive symptoms after controlling for age and sex. All MCTQ parameters showed significant correlations with actigraphy-based midpoint of sleep and circadian rhythm parameters, i.e., acrophase and L5 onset (r = .362 to .619, p &lt; .01), as well as DLMO (r = .393 to .517, p &lt; .05). The associations remained significant after controlling for age. MSFsc derived from MCTQ was significantly correlated with MEQ score in both the healthy sleepers and participants with insomnia (as defined by ISI &gt; 14), r = -.600, p &lt; .001 and r = -.543, p &lt; .001, respectively. The present study demonstrated that MCTQHK is suitable for assessing chronotype with good reliability and validity in Chinese youths and supported the utility of MCTQHK in individuals with insomnia.