---
title: >-
  Circadian preference and mental health outcomes in youth: A systematic review
  and meta-analysis
collection: publications
category: manuscripts
date: 2023-10-02T00:00:00+01:00
venue: Sleep Medicine Reviews
paperurl: /files/Cheung-2023-Circadian preference and mental he.pdf
citation: >-
  Cheung, F. T. W., Li, X., Hui, T. K., Chan, N. Y., Chan, J. W., Wing, Y. K., &
  Li, S. X. (2023). Circadian preference and mental health outcomes in youth: A
  systematic review and meta-analysis. Sleep Medicine Reviews, 72, 101851.
---
### Authors

**Forrest Tin Wai Cheung**, Xiao Li, Tsz Kwan Hui, Ngan Yin Chan, Joey Wing Yan Chan, Yun Kwok Wing, Shirley Xin Li

### Abstract

Youth is a vulnerable developmental period associated with an increased preference for eveningness and risk for developing psychopathology. Growing evidence suggests a link between eveningness and poorer mental health outcomes, but the findings in the current literature are inconsistent, and a comprehensive synthesis of evidence in this area remains lacking. This meta-analysis aimed to 1) synthesise the existing evidence on the association between circadian preference and mental health outcomes in youths and 2) explore potential sleep-related factors that may moderate the relationship between circadian preference and mental health outcomes. A systematic search of five electronic databases resulted in 81 observational studies included in the review. Eveningness was found to be significantly associated with general mental health (r = 0.20), mood-related disturbances (r = 0.17), and anxiety problems (r = 0.13). The qualitative review also identified that eveningness was associated with greater risks for psychotic symptoms and maladaptive eating behaviours. These findings highlighted the need to consider circadian preference in the clinical management of youth mental health problems. Further research is needed to examine the efficacy of a circadian-focused intervention in the context of youth mental health.